Add Clerk Express SDK docs (#1201)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/references/express/overview.mdx

  </SignedIn>

  <SignedOut>
    1. Navigate to the Clerk Dashboard.
    1. In the navigation sidebar, select [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys).
    1. In the **Quick Copy** section, copy your Clerk publishable and secret key.
    1. Paste your keys into your `.env.local` file.

    The final result should resemble the following:
  </SignedOut>

  ```sh filename=".env.local"
  NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
  CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
  ```
</Steps>

## Available methods

### `clerkMiddleware()`

The `clerkMiddleware()` helper integrates Clerk authentication into your Express application. It is required to be set in the middleware chain before using other Clerk utilities, such as `requireAuth` and `getAuth()`. It is re-exported from the `@clerk/nextjs/server` package, so see the [Next.js reference documentation](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) for more information.

```js
import { clerkMiddleware } from '@clerk/express'
```

### `requireAuth`

> The `requireAuth` helper protects routes in your Express application by checking if the user is authenticated or authorized. See the [reference documentation](/docs/references/express/require-auth) for more information.

Reviewer: It feels weird to me that `requireAuth` has a dedicated page to explain it, but `getAuth()` does not, despite the content being about the same length. I think my recommendation would be to inline the `requireAuth` info on this page honestly

### `getAuth()`

The `getAuth()` helper retrieves the authentication state, allowing you to protect your API routes or gather relevant data. It is re-exported from the `@clerk/nextjs/server` package, so see the [Next.js reference documentation](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) for more information on how to use it.

```js
import { clerkMiddleware, getAuth } from '@clerk/express'
import express from 'express'

const app = express()

const port = 3000

// Apply centralized middleware
app.use(clerkMiddleware())

> // Protect a route based on authorized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Protect a route based on authorization status
```

hasPermission = (request, response, next) => {
  const auth = getAuth(request)

  // Handle if the user is not authorized
  if (!auth.has({ permission: 'org:admin:testpermission' })) {
    response.status(403).send('Forbidden')
    return
  }

  return next()
}

> router.get('/path', requireAuth, hasPermission, getHandler)

Reviewer: `getHandler` is not actually written anywhere in this example - might want to just include a short stub here that returns a 200 or something

// Start the server and listen on the specified port
app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`Server is running on http://localhost:${port}`)
})
```

### `clerkClient`

[Clerk's JavaScript Backend SDK](/docs/references/backend/overview) exposes Clerk's Backend API resources and low-level authentication utilities for JavaScript environments. For example, if you wanted to get a list of all users in your application, instead of creating a fetch to Clerk's `https://api.clerk.com/v1/users` endpoint, you can use the `users.getUserList()` method provided by the JavaScript Backend SDK.

> All resource operations are mounted as sub-APIs on the `clerkClient` object. See the [reference documentation](/docs/references/backend/overview#usage) for more information.

Reviewer: We also need an example here of how to import the `clerkClient` object and run some simple operation using it

See the [quickstart](/docs/quickstarts/express) to get started.

## Available methods

### `clerkMiddleware()`

The `clerkMiddleware()` function checks the request's cookies and headers for a session JWT and, if found, attaches the [`Auth`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-object#auth-object) object to the request object under the `auth` key.

```js
import { clerkMiddleware } from '@clerk/express'

const app = express()

// Pass no parameters
app.use(clerkMiddleware())

// Pass options
app.use(clerkMiddleware(options))
```

#### Options

The `clerkMiddleware()` function accepts [these options](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware#clerk-middleware-options) plus the following:

<Properties>
  - `clerkClient`
  - [`ClerkClient`](/docs/references/backend/overview#create-clerk-client-options)

  An instance of the ClerkClient class. This is used to interact with the Clerk API.

  ---

  - `debug`
  - `boolean`

  A flag to enable debug mode. When enabled, the middleware will log debug information to the console.

  ---

  - `enableHandshake`

>   - `boolean`

Reviewer 2: We recently added an [SDK Development guide](https://clerk.com/docs/references/sdk/overview) where we stated that ["Full Stack" apps should implement handshake](https://clerk.com/docs/references/sdk/fullstack#add-handshake-support). I recently added the `enableHandshake` option to support this.

Upon further consideration, I believe that most apps using Clerk will likely have a frontend SDK, and therefore handshake should be enabled by default. The option should be opt-out instead 🤔

>   - `boolean`

Reviewer 2: PR settings default value of this to `true` - https://github.com/clerk/javascript/pull/4248

>   Enables Clerk's handshake flow, which helps verify the session state when a session JWT has expired. It issues a 307 redirect to refresh the session JWT if the user is still logged in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Enables Clerk's handshake flow, which helps verify the session state when a session JWT has expired. It issues a 307 redirect to refresh the session JWT if the user is still logged in. Defaults to `true`.
```

</Properties>

### `requireAuth`

> The `requireAuth()` middleware functions similarly to `clerkMiddleware()`, but also protects your routes by redirecting unauthenticated users to the sign-in page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `requireAuth()` middleware functions similarly to `clerkMiddleware()`, but also protects your routes by redirecting unauthenticated users to the sign-in page. It will look for a `CLERK_SIGN_IN_URL` environment variable and use that by default. If not present, you will need to pass a sign in url to the middleware as an option.
```

```js
import { requireAuth } from '@clerk/express'
import express from 'express'

const app = express()

// Apply middleware to all routes
app.use(requireAuth())

> // Apply middleware to a specific route

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Apply middleware to a specific route - requires `process.env.CLERK_SIGN_IN_URL` to be present
```

---
title: Clerk Express SDK
description: Learn how to integrate Express into your Clerk application.
---

Clerk makes it simple to add authentication to your Express application. This documentation covers the capabilities and methods available from Clerk's Express SDK.

See the [quickstart](/docs/quickstarts/express) to get started.

## Available methods

### `clerkMiddleware()`

> The `clerkMiddleware()` helper integrates Clerk authentication into your Express application. It is required to be set in the middleware chain before using other Clerk utilities, such as `requireAuth` and `getAuth()`.

Reviewer: I do feel like we should perhaps explain what it actually does here to clarify, which is just running `authenticateRequest` on the req object - so effectively, checking the cookies and headers to look for a session JWT, and if it finds one in either place, putting it on the request object under the `auth` key.

Reviewer 3: should we update our canonical clerkmiddleware reference then (the nextjs one)??

```js
import { clerkMiddleware } from '@clerk/express'

const app = express()

// Pass no parameters
app.use(clerkMiddleware())

> // Pass a function that will run as middleware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Pass a function that will run immediately after `clerkMiddleware` runs
```

</Properties>

### `requireAuth`

`requireAuth` is a middleware function that you can use to protect routes in your Express application. This function checks if the user is authenticated, and sends an error if they are not. If you want to customize the error response, you can handle it in an error middleware, as shown in the following example.

`clerkMiddleware()` is required to be set in the middleware chain before this util is used.

```js
import { clerkMiddleware, requireAuth, UnauthorizedError } from '@clerk/express'
import express from 'express'

const app = express()

const port = 3000

// Apply centralized middleware
app.use(clerkMiddleware())

// Define a protected route
app.get('/protected', requireAuth, (req, res) => {
  res.send('This is a protected route')
})

// Customize the error response through an error middleware
app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  // Use the provided UnauthorizedError class to check if
  // the error is an unauthorized error.
  if (err instanceof UnauthorizedError) {

>     return res.status(401).send('Unauthorized')

Reviewer: I feel like maybe returning a redirect to a sign in page would be a more relevant example here

  }

  return next(err)
})

// Start the server and listen on the specified port
app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`Server is running on http://localhost:${port}`)
})
```

### `getAuth()`

> The `getAuth()` helper retrieves authentication state from the request object. See the [Next.js reference documentation](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) for more information on how to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `getAuth()` helper retrieves authentication state from the request object. See the [Next.js reference documentation](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) for more information on how to use the returned `auth` object.
```

}

app.get('/path', requireAuth, hasPermission, (req, res) => res.json(req.auth))

// Customize the error response through an error middleware
app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  if (err instanceof UnauthorizedError) {
    return res.status(401).send('Unauthorized')
  }

  return next(err)
})

// Start the server and listen on the specified port
app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`Server is running on http://localhost:${port}`)
})
```

### `clerkClient`

[Clerk's JavaScript Backend SDK](/docs/references/backend/overview) exposes Clerk's Backend API resources and low-level authentication utilities for JavaScript environments. For example, if you wanted to get a list of all users in your application, instead of creating a fetch to Clerk's `https://api.clerk.com/v1/users` endpoint, you can use the `users.getUserList()` method provided by the JavaScript Backend SDK.

All resource operations are mounted as sub-APIs on the `clerkClient` object. See the [reference documentation](/docs/references/backend/overview#usage) for more information.

```js
import { clerkClient, requireAuth } from '@clerk/express'
import express from 'express'

const app = express()
const port = 3000

> const users = await clerkClient.users.getUserList()
> 
> app.get('/users', requireAuth, (req, res) => res.json(users))

Reviewer: This example code would fetch the users list once when the server starts and return that same list every time someone hits this endpoint, even if users had been added or removed since. I think it would be better to recommend fetching every time, as this is the normal expected behavior of such a route.

```suggestion
app.get('/users', requireAuth, async (req, res) => {
  const users = await clerkClient.users.getUserList();
  return res.json(users)
})
```

<CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
```sh filename="terminal"
npm install @clerk/express
```

```sh filename="terminal"
yarn add @clerk/express
```

```sh filename="terminal"
pnpm add @clerk/express
```
</CodeBlockTabs>

### Set environment variables

Below is an example of an `.env.local` file.

**Pro tip!** If you are signed into your Clerk Dashboard, your secret key should become visible by clicking on the eye icon. Otherwise, you can find your keys in the Clerk Dashboard on the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page.

<InjectKeys>

```env filename=".env.local"
CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
```

</InjectKeys>

</Steps>

## Available methods

All resource operations are mounted as sub-APIs on the `clerkClient` object. To access the resource operations, [you must first instantiate a `clerkClient` instance](/docs/references/express/available-methods).

## Multi-session applications

If Clerk is running in multi-session mode, it's important to ensure your frontend sends the Session ID that is making the request.

> Our middleware will look for a query string parameter named `_clerk_session_id`. If this parameter is not found, the middleware will instead choose the last active session, which may be subject to race conditions and should not be relied on for authenticating actions.

Reviewer 4: ☁️ I think we should drop the "Multi-session applications" section since it seems that we do not support `_clerk_session_id` in our backend-related SDKs.

## Error handling

Express SDK functions throw errors (`ClerkAPIResponseError`) when something goes wrong. You'll need to catch them in a `try/catch` block and handle them gracefully. For example:

```ts filename="example.ts"
try {
  const res = await someBackendApiCall();
} catch (error) {
  // Error handling

> }

Reviewer 4: 🔧 Let's add an actual API call (eg one from the above examples)

```

> > See the guide on [using Clerk with Express.js](/docs/backend-requests/handling/nodejs#express-error-handlers) to learn about Express error handling.

Reviewer 4: 🔧 The link points to `/nodejs` shouldn't it be `/expressjs`?

---
title: Clerk Express.js SDK
description: Learn how to integrate Express.js into your Clerk application.
---

# Clerk Express.js SDK

## Set up Clerk Express.js

<Steps>

### Create a Clerk application

> You need to create a Clerk application in your Clerk Dashboard before you can set up Clerk Express.js. For more information, check out our [Set up your application](/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to create a Clerk application in your Clerk dashboard before you can set up `@clerk/express`. For more information, check out our ["setting up your application"](/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk) guide.
```

Reviewer 3: We capitalize Clerk Dashboard all throughout the docs. I am going to change this back here.

Also, we don't ever put a guide's title in quotes - and I actually think it's better to not include the title at all, incase it ever changes. Let's modify the text to not mention a guide's title name.

```suggestion
You need to create a Clerk application in the Clerk Dashboard before you can set up `@clerk/express`. For more information on setting up a Clerk application, check out the [dedicated guide](/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk).
```

### Install `@clerk/express`

To get started using Clerk with Express.js, add the [SDK](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@clerk/express) to your project:

<CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
```sh filename="terminal"
npm install @clerk/express
```

```sh filename="terminal"
yarn add @clerk/express
```

```sh filename="terminal"
pnpm add @clerk/express
```
</CodeBlockTabs>

### Set environment variables

<SignedIn>

> Add the following keys to your `.env.local` file. These keys can always be retrieved from the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page of your Clerk Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following keys to your `.env.local` file. These keys can always be retrieved from the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page of your Clerk dashboard.
```

Reviewer 3: Disagree - let's leave it capitalized

</SignedIn>

<SignedOut>

> 1. Navigate to the Clerk Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the Clerk dashboard.
```

Reviewer 3: Disagree - let's leave it capitalized

2. In the navigation sidebar, select [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys).
3. In the **Quick Copy** section, copy your Clerk publishable and secret key.
4. Paste your keys into your `.env.local` file.

The final result should resemble the following:

</SignedOut>

  ```sh filename=".env.local"
  NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
  CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
  ```

</Steps>

## Available methods

The Clerk Express SDK exports the following:

> - `@clerk/backend` - You can use [Clerk's JavaScript Backend SDK](/docs/references/backend/overview) to interact with the Clerk API.

Reviewer: We need to see how it exports these things. Saying that it exports `@clerk/backend` is slightly confusing - where does it export it from? Is there a `backend` property? Does it re-export all the same methods at the top level? I assume the latter is the case, but we should be clear about this 😁

> - `clerkMiddleware()` - The [`clerkMiddleware()`](/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) helper integrates Clerk authentication into your Next.js application through Middleware.

Reviewer: It says here that this is specifically for nextjs, but there's an example above that uses it purely in an express app and makes no mention of nextjs. Is this specific to nextjs, even within the express SDK? If so, we need to call that out in the example above and provide an alternative for those not using nextjs.

Reviewer 3: so is using `clerkMiddleware()` with express is specifically for only nextjs applications? @EmmanouelaPothitou

Reviewer 4: it's incorrect. The `clerkMiddleware()` is un-related to NextJS apps. it's the core middleware required to use the `getAuth()`, ... core functionality of the `@clerk/express` in any application.

> - `getAuth()` - The [`getAuth()`](/docs/references/nextjs/get-auth) helper retrieves the authentication state, allowing you to protect your API routes or gather relevant data.

Reviewer: More of a note for @alexisintech here - this is one of those spots where we bounce you around between SDKs because we don't have good export mapping. Hopefully we can get this fixed down the line, I don't see a lot we can do about it at the moment though.

Reviewer 3: I'll make these look like external links so that the user isn't directed from one SDK to another, but instead, from one tab to another

> - `requireAuth()` -

Reviewer: This is incomplete...

Reviewer 3: I left a comment about it before your review, if you scroll up in the PR reviews - I didn't have anything to write because it's not documented

### Express error handlers

> Express comes with a default error handler for errors encountered in the middleware chain.
> 
> Developers can also implement their own custom error handlers as detailed in the [Express error handling guide](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/error-handling.html). An example error handler can be found above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Express comes with a default error handler for errors encountered in the middleware chain. Developers can also implement their own custom error handlers as detailed in the [Express error handling guide](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/error-handling.html). An example error handler can be found above.
```

Reviewer: Also I don't see an error handling example above, did we forget to add this?

Reviewer 3: This was removed, no?

> If you are using the strict middleware variant, the `err` passed to your error handler will contain enough context for you to respond as you deem fit.

Reviewer: This needs an example as well

### Install `@clerk/express`

Once a Clerk application has been created, you can install and then start using Clerk Express.js in your application. An ESM module for the Clerk Express SDK is available under the [`@clerk/express`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@clerk/express) npm package.

<CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
```sh filename="terminal"
npm install @clerk/express
```

```sh filename="terminal"
yarn add @clerk/express
```

```sh filename="terminal"
pnpm add @clerk/express
```
</CodeBlockTabs>

### Set environment variables

The developers have to load the environment variables from the .env.local file by using dotenv or any other library of their preference.
Below is an example of an .env.local file. 

**Pro tip!** If you are signed into your Clerk Dashboard, your secret key should become visible by clicking on the eye icon. Otherwise, you can find your keys in the Clerk Dashboard on the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page.

<InjectKeys>

```env filename=".env.local"
CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
```

</InjectKeys>

</Steps>

## Available methods

> All resource operations are mounted as sub-APIs on the `clerkClient` object. To access the resource operations, [you must first instantiate a `clerkClient` instance](/docs/references/express/available-methods).

Reviewer 4: ❓ Do we need this section here? The `clerkClient` is also exported in the `@clerk/clerk-sdk-node`.
